---
date: 2025/11/18
title: Thousands march outside COP30 summit in call for action
link: https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/cy40z22qqwwo
---

Marching to the beat of pounding sound systems, thousands of climate protesters have been bringing their message to the gates of the COP30 climate talks in Brazil. Chanting and singing "free the Amazon", demonstrators in host city Belém carried three giant coffins reading Oil, Coal and Gas, flanked by two grim reapers. Indigenous groups displayed signs reading "the answer is us" as an inflatable elephant and anaconda weaved through the crowd under the hot sun. It is the first time since 2021 that protesters have been allowed to demonstrate outside the UN climate talks, as the last three were held in countries that do not permit public protest. "We are holding a funeral for fossil fuels," said Tuga Cíntia from the theatre group Hydra Dance at the Federal University of Pará. "I'm here because enough is enough with COP meetings and theory. It's time for us to actually act," she added.

Indigenous communities, Brazilian youth groups, and activists from around the world joined the march in their thousands. As the midday sun intensified, some sought shelter in a petrol station forecourt. "Fossil fuels are still being burned. We know all too well what it's like to live on the frontline of climate change," said Brianna Fruean, a climate activist from Samoa. "We are here after so many COPS, marching for justice, for the end of fossil fuels," said Ilan, from the NGO 350 in Brazil. Some carried signs reading "demarcation now", calling for indigenous groups to be given legal ownership of their territories. Hundreds of indigenous groups live in the Amazon and are regarded by experts as the best protectors of biodiversity and forests. Smaller sister protests have taken place around the world, including in the UK.

Security was tight at the COP30 venue as police with riot shields guarded the entrance. On Tuesday protesters carrying signs broke through security lines at the summit, causing minor injuries to two security staff and some limited damage to the venue. Representation of indigenous voices has been a flashpoint in these talks, with some setting up stalls outside the fenced-off venue to sell products to delegates. The meeting was dubbed the "indigenous people's COP", but many groups feel their concerns over deforestation, land protection and resource extraction are not being heard.

Negotiations continued at the COP30 talks on Saturday, as nearly 200 countries met to try to make progress on tackling climate change. Little progress was made in the first week, though some delegations said they were pushing for a strategy to deliver on past promises to move away from using planet-warming fossil fuels. President Luis Ignacio Lula da Silva of Brazil is hosting the talks and chose Belém to put the world's focus on the Amazon. But shortly before the talks opened, his government granted permission to the Brazilian state oil company to explore for oil at the mouth of the Amazon.

On Friday, analysis of attendee lists by the coalition Kick Big Polluters Out (KBPO) suggested a record number of delegates from fossil fuel companies were attending the meeting. It estimated 1,600 lobbyists were in Belém, a 12% rise from last year's COP. It is common for business leaders to come to the talks to strike deals. With the US strikingly absent from negotiations, progress has been slow. It is the first time the country has sent no delegation after President Donald Trump branded climate change "a con". Earlier in the week, senior climate leaders wrote a letter urging the summit to ensure that facts about climate change were upheld. Ten countries have since signed the Declaration on Information Integrity on Climate Change, launched by the Global Initiative for Information Integrity on Climate Change. The declaration aims to create international commitments to address climate disinformation and promote evidence-based information. On the core issues of tackling the root causes of climate change and helping countries adapt to ongoing warming, Brazil has promised that COP30 will deliver concrete action on years of deals and pledges.
